And with all of that done, we want to
start getting into our regular base
styles and setting the stage up for
everything else that's gonna happen.
And this is where you really want
to lean into how CSS works and
do as much here as you can so
you can write less CSS later on.
This is a step that I see people
not taking advantage of enough,
we had the question about inheritance
earlier on, all of your text styles,
most of that stuff's inherited right away.
So if you set your typography and
your base styles up from the beginning,
it makes your life a lot
[LAUGH] Easier in the long run.
So in here, and this is where you could
make an argument also, for a sub layer.
Potentially, but I'm just gonna come
after the root selector closes,
you'll also notice the difference in
the color, the braces that are in here.
That's default VS code behavior now,
they used to need extensions for that, but
we don't anymore.
So, I know that's where the root's ending,
and I'm gonna do an html selector first.
The html selector,
you don't need to set this on the html,
you could do this on your body but I like
coming in with my font- family here.
And so in this case,
I know my font- family is my font,
I just do f I get the two choices.
I choose my body, and the other
one I do here is my line- height.
Actually with the line
he'd set earlier up, but
a lot of time I'll set my
line- height here as well.
It's one extra declaration, won't kill
anything, we're not really going to take
advantage of this in this project, but
we have a lot of root properties now.
We have root, people know of REM, so
that's looking at the font
size of your HTML element.
We also have root line height, root x,
root, other things, so it's for me, having
these set here just means that those
will actually work in a predictable way.
Because traditionally,
I used to always just apply these styles
on the body instead of
having them on the HTML.
So these days, I put my font family and
my line height there, and
then I come in with things
like my font size here.
And the reason I come in
with my font size here and
not on the HTML is because I
want my REM to stay consistent.
The base font size that we had,
the font size 400, if we come and
take a look at it, or actually that one's
staying the same at both sizes, but
a lot of the time your font size at
your base level will actually change.
And that means whatever one REM is would
change with everything if you'd set it on
your HTML, which I don't wanna happen.
So I always, just for consistency sake,
I like having the font size on my body,
so that would be my,
sorry, I was going to do
font-size- regular right there.
The color as well, you can just come
in with the color, in this case,
I prefixed them with text.
You might wanna prefix it just
with the word color instead.
I have my text-main and
I should be able to hit save and
I see those coming through.
Right away, I know that there's a Problem,
because I can barely read my text.
So that reminds me that I also want
to change my background-color, and
this is why I like having live server
on so then I can do my background and
in this case, it would be my
background-main, and I set it there.
And again, this is why I really like
custom properties that are telling me
exactly how they're being used,
because I don't have to figure it out.
I just look at my background colors,
and I probably know which one I want,
it makes my life a lot easier,
right there.
So yeah, those are coming in,
those are looking pretty good,
I might have forgotten something
along the way here too.
I find a lot of the time when I'm
setting up these base styles,
I sort of just do what I remember.
And then I keep going,
and then every now and
then you're gonna remember that you forgot
something you just go back and add it.
There's this thing where people
feel like they have to write like
the perfect code right away.
There's no harm in like, I forgot
this one property, or this one thing.
So, we'll double check after to make
sure I didn't forget anything, but
at this point, I would keep going.
And we can set up some other things,
so this is my font-size, my color,
we can do the same thing now for
my headings.
So h1, h2, h3, maybe we have an h4
in this project, I'm not sure,
and we can do something like
font-family and then --ff.
Once again for the heading,
I wouldn't set a font size here, but
if you do look in the project,
dive through the Figma file.
All of the headings are the bright color,
so
we can say the color is the high contrast.
And I can see that's changed,
it's not the easiest thing to see, but
you can definitely see
that it has shifted over.
Then we can say that my h1 set up your
font styles, so the sizes I mean,
so font-size is in this case,
actually we didn't decide earlier,
so this would be something we'll come
back to and we style the main area there.
So my font size, I have to decide
if I want the extra large and
then if I'm gonna do something
to make the top area smaller.
Or if I'm gonna say
that it's the large and
then do something to make
the bottom text bigger.
I'm gonna do it this way, but if you
think the other way around, makes sense.
Choose whichever one you want, but
I should see that text get nice and big.
Now, the one thing I will say here,
actually, with these is, right now,
I'm selecting that on an h1,
for that one for
now, I'm gonna leave it on the h1 it's
probably not the end of the world, but
I tend to avoid setting base
styles on the heading levels.
So a lot of people do like, doing like,
then they're h2 setting the styles there
for like, the next font size down and
then the next font size down.
But wrong shortcut, if we come and
take a look at the Figma file.
If I look here like this,
makes sense to be an h2 and
then these guys down here
wouldn't become an h3, so
my h3 here is kind of big, not huge,
but it's big enough and orange.
But then if I come and take a look here,
these are probably also h3s, and,
there's these over here also gonna
be h3's when I'm looking at this.
And one problem that you can run into,
if you're using the regular
selector like this is,
you're gonna start picking styles,
you're gonna start picking elements
based on how you style them.
Rather than picking the right
semantic element to go with it, so,
I don't like having my style linked
to the semantic version of something.
I just find that all it does is make
me make bad decisions along the way.
So instead of linking it to an h1, h2,
h3, this one will leave like this and
potentially change a little bit later.
But for my h2, we could come in,
and instead of that,
maybe it's a section title instead, or
maybe you could even have heading-md or
different things.
We're gonn tackle this a little bit later,
once we actually have
to start styling them.
If you wanna start thinking about that
now, it's a really good thing to sort of
start exploring and thinking about
a little bit just because, yeah,
I like separating those
concerns as much as possible.
Just to make sure I'm choosing
the right semantic element and
then just using CSS to style it, and
doing that with a range of selectors,
instead of linking it directly to the h1,
h2, h3, levels.
Some projects you're gonna have, if you
have a blog site where it's just always
consistent everywhere, then you're
fine just using your h1, h2, h3.
Another thing that you might
see people do is h1, h1 so
you could use an h1 selector or an h1
class if it's an h2 that needs to look
like an h1 this is really popular, or
you could this could also be title.
There's other ways of doing it,
primary-title could be another one,
there's so many different ways
of doing this primary that it really
depends on how you like to work.
I am of the mind where I tend not to want
to use the semantic selectors at all,
just because then people,
especially if it's not a solo project, and
other people are touching the code, you're
just enabling them to make a mistake.
So by not having any styles
associated with the semantics of it,
it's a nice way to strip away that
potential problem that could come up.
So the only other one here that I think
does deserve some styling are just
the link colors.
We don't really have any links in this
project outside of the navigation.
So we don't have a lot to go on, but
just setting them up as a basic one
like this could go really well.
But I do wanna highlight one thing in
there that you might not have seen before,
which is focus visible.
So if we come in here, and as I said,
we'll come back to the section and
the heading things in a little bit,
maybe I'll even take I'll leave this
one just because it looks a bit better.
But we'll revisit that,
but with your link,
you can obviously come in
with whatever color you want.
So in this case, it could even be a color
inherit in I think it's the high contrast,
though, so
we'll do the high contrast for that one.
And then I had an a hover, and
then a usually you would see something
like this where you'd
be doing a focus state.
Focus is the old way of doing things,
it's when you're keyboard navigating.
So let's just say the color here is red,
now, just so
we can actually see this in action,
if I tab over, the color of
it changes because it's gained focus
while I'm tabbing on something.
The default in all the browsers for
every element that was using focus is now.
Focus-visible, which on a link
will work exactly the same way and
won't actually change anything.
The difference here is if you have
a button and we're gonna have a button
eventually, so we'll delete this in a bit,
but I'm just gonna do it to show you.
Hello there, if ever you have a button,
and let's just change this for
now to button, just to highlight
what focus visible is doing.
If I click on this,
when I'm hovering on top of it, whoops,
let's change this to focus first,
and we'll do that as a background.
Just to make it easy to see.
If I click on it and
then move my mouse away, it's gained focus
because when you click on something
that's interactive, it gains focus.
Usually, when you click on a button,
something happens and you don't want it to
keep that like the navigation opens or
something over here does something.
You don't wanna users staring at this
button that has changed focus states so
focus-visible prevents that
from happening, focus-visible.
If I click on my button when I leave,
it's acting only as a hover,
as long as I'm doing that with my mouse.
If I keyboard navigate to it,
when it gains focus, it's showing
because if your keyboard navigating,
you need to be able to see what the users
actually highlighted or done there.
So the basic rule is focused-visible
the browser, we'll figure it out based on
what the type of element it is and
how the users interacting with it.
Whereas, if you just use focus, that state
will always get applied no matter what.
So in general, focus-visibles probably
what you want to actually use there.
So I'm gonna switch these both back to
being a, and then just do the color.
And this case,
it was the brand-light on there for
the hover state on those, and that's good.
Then the underline and other things we'll
tackle once we get to the navigation,
cuz I think in general you wanna leave
the underline on your links to make
sure people know that
they're actually links.